---
title: "The Great Divide: Preflight vs Inflight Resource Creation ⚔️"
description: Why does Wing only let you create resources in preflight?
authors: 
  - rybickic
tags: [cloud-oriented programming, winglang, resources, preflight, inflight, iac, security]
hide_table_of_contents: true
---

Wing is a cloud-oriented programming language we’re building that aims to break
down the barriers that get in the way of building applications using cloud
services, and bring back the flow for developers.

One of the main features of Wing is that it distinguishes between "preflight" 
(code that defines your cloud infrastructure, and runs as part of
compilation) and "inflight" (code that runs in the cloud, at runtime). We
believe this distinction –- and the ability to write code that reaches across the
preflight-inflight boundary using safe abstractions –- makes it easier to build
scalable cloud applications, both by encouraging best practices, and helping
developers avoid common pitfalls.

An important difference between preflight and inflight is that resources can
only be created in preflight. For example, if you try creating a `new
cloud.Bucket()` or `new cloud.Counter()` inside of an inflight method, you’ll
get a compiler error:

```
Error: Cannot create the resource "Bucket" in inflight phase.
```

**So why doesn’t Wing let you create resources while inflight?**

Even though Wing makes a distinction between preflight and inflight operations
(like creating a bucket versus putting an object inside a bucket), most cloud
providers typically don't make this same distinction in their APIs.

For example, in [AWS's documentation for
SQS](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSSimpleQueueService/latest/APIReference/API_AddPermission.html)
(Amazon's distributed queue service), you can see that operations like
`CreateQueue` and `SendMessage` are listed side by side. In Google Cloud's
documentation for their Pub/Sub service, we see the [same
thing](https://cloud.google.com/pubsub/docs/reference/rest/v1/projects.topics)
-- creating topics and publishing to topics are serviced as part of a single set
of APIs.

**The reason Wing limits resource creation to the preflight phase is because we
believe dynamic resource creation leads to applications that are less stable and
harder to maintain.** Let’s dive into why this is.

## Resource management is hard

First, dynamic resource creation introduces enormous complexity from a resource
management perspective. This is part of the reason why the IaC (infrastructure
as code) tools were created. Not only is it too cumbersome and error-prone to
create large numbers of cloud resources by clicking buttons in your web browser,
but it also becomes difficult to reliably maintain and update the
infrastructure.

When you use tools like Terraform or CloudFormation, you typically create a YAML
file or JSON file that describes resources in a declarative format. These
solutions have several benefits:

* By using version control, it's easier to identify where resources came from or
when they were changed among different versions of your app (especially across
apps and teams).
* Provisioning tools can detect and fix "resource drift" (when the actual
configuration of a resource differs from the desired configuration).
* You can estimate the cost of your workload based on the list of resources
using tools like [infracost](https://www.infracost.io).
* It's more straightforward to clean up / spin down your application -- all of
the resources you need to delete are listed in the file.

When resources are created, updated, and deleted dynamically as part of an
application's data path, we lose many of these benefits. I’ve heard of many
cases where an application was designed around creating resources dynamically,
and entire projects and teams had to be dedicated *just* to garbage collecting
these resources.

Applications depending on dynamic resource creation are needed in some cases of
course (like applications that provision cloud resources on behalf of a user),
but these tend to be the exception to the rule.

## Static app architectures are more resistant to network changes

Second, dynamic resource creation can make your application more likely to
encounter runtime errors in production. Resource creation and deletion typically
requires performing control plane operations on the underlying cloud provider,
while most inflight operations only require data plane operations.

Cloud services are more fault tolerant when they only depend on data plane
operations as part of the business logic's critical path. This is because even
if the control plane of a cloud resource has an outage (for example, if AWS
Lambda had a partial outage so that Lambda functions could not be updated with
new code), the data plane can continue running with the last known
configuration, even as servers come in and out of service. This property, called
static stability, is a desirable attribute in distributed systems.

## Dynamic resource creation requires looser security permissions

Lastly, dynamic resource creation means your code needs to have admin-like
permissions, which dramatically increases the attack surface for bad actors. In
the cloud, most machines ultimately need some form of network access - whether
it’s to connect with other VMs in a cluster, or to connect to other cloud
services (like automatically scaling databases and messaging queues).

When resources are statically defined, you can narrowly scope these permissions
to define which resources are exposed to the public, which resources can call
which endpoints, and even which teams can view sensitive data (and how data
accesses are logged and audited).

## Closing thoughts

For all these reasons, Wing's design encourages developers to create resources
in preflight as the path of [least
friction](./2023-02-02-good-cognitive-friction.md). Since Wing will let you make
network requests or make calls into JavaScript or TypeScript libraries in
inflight code, you can still directly make calls to a cloud provider (like Azure
or AWS) to request resources to be created in your application logic if you so
choose. But in these scenarios, Wing doesn’t provide resource management
capabilities or security permission generation for you, so it's your
responsibility to manage the resource and ensure it gets cleaned up.

With these caveats in mind, we would love to hear your feedback about this
design -- and if you have a use case where dynamically creating resources would
be useful, please share it with us through a [GitHub
issue](https://github.com/winglang/wing/issues/new/choose) or on this blog's
[discussion post](https://github.com/winglang/wing/discussions/1490)!
